[KOGITO-7276] - [KSW-Guides] Building Workflow Images locally with Qu… (#8)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/cloud/build-workflow-image-with-quarkus-cli.adoc

Building Workflow Images locally with Quarkus CLI
=================================================

> Author Name <fspolti@redhat.com>

Reviewer: I think we can remove this. See: https://github.com/kiegroup/droolsjbpm-build-bootstrap#faq

v1.0, 06-03-2022
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Build Serverless Application with Quarkus CLI
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, quarkus-cli
// links
:quarkus-kogito-examples: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/kogito-quarkus-examples
:example-project: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus
:quarkus-cli: https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling

> :quarkus-container-images: https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image

Reviewer: Pretty cool! cc @akumar074 @amadhusu I think we can add this to the "how to write".

> On this guild you will learn how to build a Serverless Application using *Quarkus CLI*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will teach you how to build a Serverless Application image using the *Quarkus CLI*.
```

== Pre Requisites

> Before starting make sure you have the needed dependencies installed.
> For this tutorial we assume that you already have your Serverless Workflow ready to be built inside
> a container image. If not, you can use some of the {quarkus-kogito-examples}[examples], for this tutorial we will be using the {example-project}[serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus].

Reviewer: Wdyt? 

```suggestion
Before starting, make sure you have the needed dependencies installed.
We assume that you already have your Serverless Workflow application ready to be built inside
a container image for this tutorial. If not, you can follow the Getting Started guide, the example project we use in this tutorial.
```

You can then update the links if you agree.

What will you need:

- Docker - recommended to use always the latest version.

>     * if you don't have it installed or can't install it, don't worry, `JiB` allows you to build Container images wihtouth having the client tooling to build containers, however, it will require the push the built image to a registry, which is described in the following lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * It's not a problem if you don't have Docker installed or can't install it. https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib[JiB] allows you to build container images without having the client tooling to build containers. However, Docker is required to push the image to a registry.
```

- {quarkus-cli}[Quarkus CLI] {quarkus_version}
- Java {java_min_version}
- Maven {maven_min_version}

> - GraalVM {graalvm_min_version}: Note that, GraalVM is option if you already have the expected version installed locally.

Reviewer: What do you mean here?

Author: rephrased.

== Getting started

> First, let's clone the {kogito-examples}[kogito-examples] repository and access the {example-project}[serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus] example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, clone the {kogito-examples}[kogito-examples] repository and access the {example-project}[serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus] example.
```

.Cloning Kogito Examples
[source,shell]
----
$ git clone --branch stable {kogito-examples} && kogito-examples/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus
----

> If you wish to run the example beforehand, follow the steps described on the example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you wish to run the example beforehand, follow the steps described in the Getting Started guide.
```
If you agree, please add the link to the guide.

> With the example in place, let's visit {quarkus-cli}[Quarkus CLI], follow the installation instructions based on your preferred tool. Make sure you have the following Quarkus version installed:

Reviewer: I think this procedure will be covered here: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-docs/blob/main/serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/getting-started/getting-familiar-with-our-tooling.adoc

So we can skip this explanation now, and add a link to that other guide.

"Assumed that you already have the Quarkus tooling installed, if not please visit: ..."

Author: +1

=== Checking Quarkus CLI

[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus version
----

> 

Reviewer: Can we have a section here?

```asciidoc
=== Quarkus Container Extensions
```

Quarkus provides a few different extensions to build Container Images, like `JiB`, `docker`, `s2i` and `buildpacks`.
For this guide we will use `JiB`. If you already use another extension or have curiosity to know how it works, please visit this {quarkus-container-images}[Quarkus' guide].

The Kogito Examples does not include the needed extensions, we'll need to add it using the Quarkus CLI:

.Adding the JiB extension
[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus extension add 'container-image-jib'
----

If you inspect the pom.xml, you can check the new dependency added:
.Checkin the JiB extension
[source,xml,subs="attributes+"]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-container-image-jib</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

> === Building the Serverless Application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Building the Serverless Workflow Application
```

[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus build -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.group=spolti \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.name=serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.tag=1.0 \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.registry=quay.io
----

Note that JiB caches the `target/lib`, that, depending on how big your project is, it can speed up the rebuilds.
If you want to push it to a registry, make sure to set the following properties accordingly your needs:

- quarkus.container-image.registry: registry address, e.g. _quay.io_.
- quarkus.container-image.group: registry _context/namespace_ or if on k8s or ocp the _namespace/project_.

> - quarkus.container-image.push: needs to be set to `true`, identify whether to push or not the image, defaults to `false`.

Reviewer: What about suggesting the user to create a maven profile. See: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/blob/main/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-newsletter-subscription/subscription-flow/pom.xml#L215-L227

Can be an additional, optional, more advanced section.

> - quarkus.container-image.push: needs to be set to `true`, identify whether to push or not the image, defaults to `false`.

Author: that is a good idea.

> - quarkus.container-image.push: needs to be set to `true`, identify whether to push or not the image, defaults to `false`.

Author: Actually, I am not sure about it, I didn't find a way to select the maven profile with quarkus cli.

> - quarkus.container-image.push: needs to be set to `true`, identify whether to push or not the image, defaults to `false`.

Reviewer: Oh yes, the user would have to change the pom manually.

> - quarkus.container-image.push: needs to be set to `true`, identify whether to push or not the image, defaults to `false`.

Author: added.

----

The command above will result on the following Container image: `quay.io/spolti/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0`

==== Building the Serverless Application with Native Image

And what about native builds? When we talk about Serverless we do expect small startup footprint which can be better when using Native Builds. Quarkus CLI allows you to do it by passing the _--native_ flag:

.Build Native Image
[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus build --native -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.group=spolti \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.name=serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.tag=1.0-native \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.registry=quay.io \
    -Dquarkus.native.container-build=true
----

The command above will result on the following Container image: `quay.io/spolti/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0-native`

If you don't have GraalVM installed, you can specify the _**quarkus.native.container-build=true**_ system properties. This property will create a Linux executable. Notice that, Native builds take longer than usual java builds.

=== Testing the built Container Image

> If you do have Docker installed, the image will also be pushed to Docker's local registry:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do have Docker installed, Quarkus will push the image to Docker's local registry:
```

.JVM image
[source,shell]
----
$ docker run -it -p 8080:8080 quay.io/spolti/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0
...
INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus 1.22.1.Final on JVM (powered by Quarkus 2.9.2.Final) started in 1.302s
----

.Native Image
[source,shell]
----

> $ docker run -it -p 8080:8080 quay.io/spolti/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0-native

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ docker run -it -p 8080:8080 quay.io/kogito/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0-native
```

...
INFO  [io.quarkus] (main) serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus 1.22.1.Final native (powered by Quarkus 2.9.2.Final) started in 0.039s
----

Notice that the Native image startup is more than 1 second faster than the first one.

> Let's invoke the application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's invoke the application.
```

> With the native image started, execute the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having the image started, execute the following command:
```

[source,shell]
----
$ curl -X POST -H 'Content-Type:application/json' -H 'Accept:application/json' -d '{"workflowdata" : {"name": "John", "language": "English"}}' http://localhost:8080/jsongreet
----

> As output, the following response will be returned:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check to see if the response is similar to the following:
```

[source,json]
----
{
    "id": "2acf710d-7e4a-481d-925c-dfd85a369987",
    "workflowdata": {
        "name": "John",
        "language": "English",
        "greeting": "Hello from JSON Workflow, "
    }
}
----

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we can add a section "What's Next" and add a few more links. I believe the next step will be deploying to Minikube (and also the k8s one you added).

Author: Added.
So far, minikube and kubernetes.

Building Workflow Images locally with Quarkus CLI
=================================================
v1.0, 06-03-2022
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Build Serverless Application with Quarkus CLI
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, quarkus-cli
// links
:quarkus-kogito-examples: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/kogito-quarkus-examples
:example-project: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus
:quarkus-cli: https://quarkus.io/guides/cli-tooling
:quarkus-container-images: https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image
:quarkus-native-builds: https://quarkus.io/guides/building-native-image
:google-jib: https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib

> This guide will teach you how to build a Serverless Application Container Image using the *Quarkus CLI*.

Reviewer: Can we add the link to the Quarkus CLI?

== Pre Requisites

Before starting, make sure you have the needed dependencies installed.
We assume that you already have your Serverless Workflow application ready to be built inside

> a container image for this tutorial. If not, you can follow the Getting Started guide, the example project we use in this tutorial.

Reviewer: Can we have the link for the getting started guide?

> a container image for this tutorial. If not, you can follow the Getting Started xref:getting-started/create-your-first-workflow-service.adoc[guide], of use the example project we've use in this tutorial.

Author: is this + signal correct?

What will you need:

- Docker - recommended to use always the latest version.
    * It's not a problem if you don't have Docker installed or can't install it. {google-jib}[JiB] allows you to build container images without having the client tooling to build containers. However, Docker is required to build GraalVM native image using the Quarkus Native Builder image.

- {quarkus-cli}[Quarkus CLI] {quarkus_version}
- Java {java_min_version}
- Maven {maven_min_version}
- GraalVM {graalvm_min_version}: Note that, GraalVM is not a required dependency, if you don't have it installed you can use the Quarkus Native Builder image to perform a local build, however, it will require to have the Docker tool installed.

== Getting started

First, clone the {kogito-examples}[kogito-examples] repository and access the {example-project}[serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus] example.

.Cloning Kogito Examples
[source,shell]
----

> $ git clone --branch stable {kogito-examples} && kogito-examples/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus

Author: updated.

----

If you wish to run the example beforehand, follow the steps described in the Getting Started guide.

> With the example in place, let's visit {quarkus-cli}[Quarkus CLI], follow the installation instructions based on your preferred tool. Make sure you have the following Quarkus version installed:

Author: fixed,

=== Quarkus Container Extensions

At this point it is ssumed that you already have the Quarkus tooling installed, if not please visit: xref:getting-started/getting-familiar-with-our-tooling.adoc[Getting familiar with our tooling].

> Quarkus provides a few extensions to build container images, like `JiB`, `docker`, `s2i`, and `buildpacks`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quarkus provides a few extensions to build container images, like `Jib`, `docker`, `s2i`, and `buildpacks`. +
```

> For this guide, we use `JiB`. However, if you already use another extension or want to know how it works, please visit this {quarkus-container-images}[Quarkus' guide].

Reviewer 2: Please replace all `JiB` with `Jib`. See https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib

The Kogito Examples do not include the needed extensions. We will add it using the Quarkus CLI:

.Adding the JiB extension
[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus extension add 'container-image-jib'
----

If you inspect the pom.xml, you can check the newly added dependency.

> .Checkin the JiB extension

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Checking the JiB extension
```

[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus build -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.group=kogito \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.name=serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.tag=1.0 \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.registry=quay.io \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.push=true
----

The command above will result in the following container image: `quay.io/kogito/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0`.

Alternatively, you can create a maven profile to build the container image that can be triggered just by setting the target profile.

.Maven Profile Example
[source,xml]
----
<profile>
  <id>build-container</id>
  <properties>
    <quarkus.container-image.build>true</quarkus.container-image.build>
    <quarkus.container-image.group>kogito</quarkus.container-image.group>
    <quarkus.container-image.name>serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus</quarkus.container-image.name>
    <quarkus.container-image.tag>1.0</quarkus.container-image.tag>
    <quarkus.container-image.registry>quay.io</quarkus.container-image.registry>
    <quarkus.container-image.push>true</quarkus.container-image.push>
  </properties>
</profile>
----

> If using profiles, a new extension can be added to the target profile by setting profile name like the example below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using profiles, a new extension can be added to the targeted profile by setting the profile name in the build command like the example below:
```

Author: This sentence should be rephrased, there is no support for adding extension with cli or quarkus maven plugin.

.Using Quarkus CLI with Maven profile
[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus build -- -Pbuild-container
----

==== Building the Serverless Workflow Application with Native Image

> And what about native builds? When we talk about Serverless, we expect a small startup footprint that can be better when using Native Builds. Quarkus CLI allows you to do it by passing the _--native_ flag:

Author: is the + signal correct?

> And what about native builds? When we talk about Serverless, we expect a small startup footprint that can be better when using Native Builds. Quarkus CLI allows you to do it by passing the _--native_ flag:

Reviewer 2: https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/syntax-quick-reference/#paragraphs see `hard line breaks`

.Build Native Image
[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus build --native -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.group=kogito \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.name=serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.tag=1.0-native \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.registry=quay.io \
    -Dquarkus.native.container-build=true
----

The command above will result in the following container image: `quay.io/kogito/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0-native`

> If you don't have GraalVM installed, you can specify the _**quarkus.native.container-build=true**_ system properties. This property will create a Linux executable. Notice that, Native builds take longer than usual java builds. For more information about native builds please visit this {quarkus-native-builds}[guide].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: If you don't have GraalVM installed, you can specify the _**quarkus.native.container-build=true**_ system properties. This property will create a Linux executable. Notice that, Native builds take longer than usual java builds. For more information about native builds please visit this {quarkus-native-builds}[guide].
```

Quarkus provides a few extensions to build container images, like `Jib`, `docker`, `s2i`, and `buildpacks`.
For this guide, we use `Jib`. However, if you already use another extension or want to know how it works, please visit this {quarkus_container_images_url}[Quarkus' guide].

The Kogito Examples do not include the needed extension by default. We will add it using the Quarkus CLI:

.Adding the Jib extension
[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus extension add 'container-image-jib'
----

If you inspect the pom.xml, you can check the newly added dependency.

.Checkin the Jib extension
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-container-image-jib</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

=== Building the Serverless Workflow Application

[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus build -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.group=kogito \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.name=serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.tag=1.0 \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.registry=quay.io
----

Note that Jib caches the `target/lib` directory. Depending on how big your project is, it can speed up the rebuilds.

> If you want to push it to a registry, make sure to set the following properties accordingly to your needs:

Author: there will be a another topic about it.

> If you want to push it to a registry, make sure to set the following properties accordingly to your needs:

Author: It is just a example that illustrate how to use Jib to push the built container automatically, the steps required to push to minikube and k8s will be better described on the topics listed on the What's next section.

- `quarkus.container-image.registry`: registry address, e.g. _quay.io_.
- `quarkus.container-image.group`: registry _context/namespace_ or if on Kubernetes or OpenShift the _namespace/project_.
- `quarkus.container-image.push`: needs to be set to `true`, identify whether to push or not the image, defaults to `false`.

.Example on pushing the built Application to Quay.io
[source,shell]
----
$ quarkus build -Dquarkus.container-image.build=true \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.group=kogito \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.name=serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.tag=1.0 \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.registry=quay.io \
    -Dquarkus.container-image.push=true
----

The command above will result in the following container image: `quay.io/kogito/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus:1.0`.

Alternatively, you can create a maven profile to build the container image that can be triggered just by setting the target profile.

> .Maven Profile Example

Author: @ricardozanini have asked for it :)

> .Maven Profile Example

Reviewer 3: I'm fine either way.  I think it's probably something we want to revisit if this could be done easier in the future.

Building Workflow Images locally with Quarkus CLI
=================================================
v1.0, 06-03-2022
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Build Serverless Application with Quarkus CLI
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, serverless, quarkus-cli
// links
:example-project: https://github.com/kiegroup/kogito-examples/tree/stable/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus

:quarkus-container-images: https://quarkus.io/guides/container-image
:quarkus-native-builds: https://quarkus.io/guides/building-native-image

> :google-jib: https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib

Reviewer: I think we need to standardize these variables by adding a suffix to them. For example: `google-jib-url`

Author: sounds good.
@akumar074 please add this to the contributors' guide.

- GraalVM {graalvm_min_version}: Note that, GraalVM is not a required dependency, if you don't have it installed you can use the Quarkus Native Builder image to perform a local build, however, it will require to have the Docker tool installed.

== Getting started

First, you need to clone the {kogito_examples}[kogito-examples] repository and go to the {example-project}[serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus] example.

.Cloning Kogito Examples
[source,shell,subs="attributes+"]
----
$ git clone --branch stable {kogito_examples} && cd kogito-examples/kogito-quarkus-examples/serverless-workflow-greeting-quarkus
----

If you wish to run the example beforehand, follow the steps described in the Getting Started guide.

With the example in place, let's visit {quarkus-cli}[Quarkus CLI], follow the installation instructions based on your preferred tool. Make sure you have the following Quarkus version installed:

> .Adding the Jib extension

Reviewer 4: This line looks unrelated here.

== Prerequisites

> Before starting, make sure you have the needed dependencies installed. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before starting, make sure you have the needed dependencies installed. +
```

Just curious, why do we need this plus sign? What does it do?

Author: I made the same question to Tristan :)
Yes.

Reviewer 2: this is forcing a line break: https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/syntax-quick-reference/#paragraphs
